.TH XDaliClock 1 "25-Aug-2022 (2.45)" "X Version 11"
.SH NAME
xdaliclock - melting digital clock
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B xdaliclock
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fIxdaliclock\fP program displays a digital clock; when a digit
changes, it melts into its new shape.

This program was inspired by the Alto and Macintosh programs of the same
name, written by Steve Capps in 1983 or 1984.
.SH COMMAND-LINE OPTIONS
.TP 4
.B \-\-display\fP \fIhost:display.screen\fP
The X display to use.
.TP 4
.B \-\-version
Print the version number and exit.
.TP 4
.B \-\-root
Render on the root window instead of opening an application window.
.TP 4
.B \-\-window\-id \fInumber\fP
Render on an existing X11 Window instead of its own window.
.SH GESTURES
.TP 4
.B Single click
Display the date.  It will also be briefly shown about once a minute.
.TP 4
.B Double click
Switch between 12-hour and 24-hour mode.
.TP 4
.B Right click
Open the preferences dialog.
.TP 4
.B Left arrow or down arrow keys
Reduce the number of digits shown (e.g. HH:MM:SS to HH:MM).
.TP 4
.B Right arrow or up arrow keys
Increase the number of digits shown (e.g. HH:MM to HH:MM:SS).
.SH PREFERENCES
.TP 4
.B Date & Time
How to format the date and time, and how many digits to use.
.TP 4
.B Colors
The starting foreground and background colors, and how quickly to
cycle their hues.
.TP 4
.B Countdown timer
To count down to (and then up from) a target time, enter it in the
form \fI"YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS"\fP.  If the \fI"Seconds only in home stretch"\fP
box is checked, the display will switch to a seconds-only display 30 seconds
before the target.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.B DISPLAY
to get the default host and display number.
.TP 8
.B XSCREENSAVER_WINDOW
The window ID to use with \fI\-\-root\fP.
.TP 8
.B GSETTINGS_SCHEMA_DIR
Where preferences and defaults are stored.
.SH UPGRADES
The latest version can be found at https://www.jwz.org/xdaliclock/

There are also version of this program there for macOS, iOS, Android
and others.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 1991-2022 by Jamie Zawinski.
Permission to use, copy, modify, distribute, and sell this software
and its documentation for any purpose is hereby granted without fee,
provided that the above copyright notice appear in all copies and that
both that copyright notice and this permission notice appear in
supporting documentation.  No representations are made about the
suitability of this software for any purpose.  It is provided "as is"
without express or implied warranty.
.SH AUTHOR
Jamie Zawinski <jwz@jwz.org>, 18-sep-91.

Based on a concept by Steve Capps.
